---
layout: post
title: "Looking Back At My First Game"
date: 2025-04-05 12:00:00 -0500
categories: [Game Development]
tags: [Game Development, Unity, C#]
media_subpath: /assets/405gdp
description: What I've learned about the game-development process.
image: flowerwind.png
---

Since 2020, I've been focused on game development over any other topic in computer science. From experimenting in Unity, to creating my own game engine using OpenGL, game development has been at the center of my computer science career.

However, until May 2024, I never pushed myself to create a game from start to finish.

Thanks to a Game Development Class, I was able to finally create my first real game, **NatureBound**

## The First Steps

At the start of this class, I had about 3 years of experience with Unity, and about a year of experience with Blender, so I knew I had an advantage over my classmates.

I knew that I would be using Unity for the final project, and I would have to present it (which I did), and I already had a few ideas for what I would be developing.

There were many ideas from me and my group, as we were confined to the United Nations Goals for the topics we were to create our game for. We eventually chose [Goal 15](https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal15), which regards environmental conservation.

One of my teammates' ideas was to create a city builder where an ecosystem would be built.

My idea, was to create a roguelike/lite where we would be gradually saving an ecosystem the farther into a run we went.

We eventually chose my idea, which went on to create the game.

## Research

We had two major things to research. Roguelikes, and Ecosystem Restoration.

I did most of the product research, where I would look for competitors already established in the industry such as The Binding of Isaac, Cult of the Lamb, or Pokémon. (including some smaller opponents such as [Equilinox](https://equilinox.com) by TinyMatrix)

To ensure we had a good view of our audience, we needed to do a Market Survey, where we realized most people do not know what a roguelike game is. However, they were happy to hear about the fact we were inspired by Pokémon.

After extensive research, we decided to research the impact of pesticides on not only aquatic life, but also other life forms in the Chesapeake Bay.

## The Game Design Document